Documentation/add data model manual (#4)
stellio-hub/stellio-docs: docs/source/dataModel.md

# <a name="top"></a>Data model

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [NGSI-LD data Model](#NGSI-LD-Data-Model)
* [Semantic Supports in `Stellio`](#Semantic-Supports-in-Stellio)
* [NGSI-LD Mapping in `Stellio`](#NGSI-LD-Mapping-in-Stellio)
* [NGSI-LD Mapping Example in `Stellio`](#NGSI-LD-Mapping-Example-in-Stellio)
* [Neo4J and TimescaleDB databases](#Neo4J-and-TimescaleDB-databases)

## Introduction
Stellio context broker supports exchanging data in the NGSI-LD format. For more details about NGSI-LD data format and data model please check the [NGSI-LD How To]( https://fiware-datamodels.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ngsi-ld_howto/index.html) pages.

In this section, we briefly remind main basics of the NGSI-LD data models. The semantic supports in `Stellio` context broker are then highlighted. `Stellio` mapping approach and use case example are then explained. Finally, the technologies used by `Stellio` for supporting semantics and storing data in graph formats are presented.

[Top](#top)
## NGSI-LD Data Model

An NGSI-LD entity is composed of:

> - **id** (mandatory): The Id of the Entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **id** (mandatory): The identifier of the Entity (URI format).
```

- **type** (mandatory): The type of the Entity
- **Properties** (optional)
- **Relationships** (optional)

> - **@context** (mandatory): Json-LD specification for linked data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **@context** (mandatory): JSON-LD specification for linked data.
```

A property in NGSI-LD is composed of

> - **type** (mandatory): `Property` or `GeoProperty` .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **type** (mandatory): `Property` or `GeoProperty`
```

- **value** (mandatory)

> - **unitCode** (optional): The unit of the value in [CEFACT]() format.

Reviewer: you're missing a link here

- **Properties** (optional)
- **Relationships** (optional)

> A Relationship in NGSI-LD is composed of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A relationship in NGSI-LD is composed of
```

- **type** (mandatory): `Relationship`

> - **object** (mandatory): The URI of the Entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **object** (mandatory): The URI of the target Entity.
```

- **Properties** (optional)
- **Relationships** (optional)

Temporal Properties `observedAt`, `createdAt` and `observedAt` follow the [ISO 8086](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) format.

[Top](#top)
## Semantic Supports in Stellio

> Storing NGSI-LD entities with their relationships and properties in semantic databases (triple stores) is a complex task especially with time series IoT data. In fact, the [RDF reification](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Reify.html) is the default way to model property graphs, by allowing to attach properties to relationships, which is not directly supported by triple stores. For this purpose, most of the actual implementations of the NGSI-LD context brokers have switched to syntactic databases where the linked data aspect in Json-LD is only serving as definition for the NGSI-LD attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Storing NGSI-LD entities with their relationships and properties in semantic databases (triple stores) is a complex task especially with time series IoT data. In fact, the [RDF reification](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Reify.html) is the default way to model property graphs, by allowing to attach properties to relationships, which is not directly supported by triple stores. For this purpose, most of the actual implementations of the NGSI-LD context brokers have switched to syntactic databases where the linked data aspect in JSON-LD is only serving as definition for the NGSI-LD attributes.
```

To enhance the exploitation of the semantic Web technologies such as reasoning, multi-typing, data validation... `Stellio` adopts an innovative mapping format which simplify the process of storing NGSI-LD entities in an efficient graph database, where the aspect of linked data is ensured.

> An entity in `Stellio` is stored as a set of linked nodes via labelled edges. Any updates on attributes of this entity  will updates the values of the nodes and produces a new storing event in time series databases for the former values. In a such process, the context is stored in a graph database, latest values of properties and relationships are also stored in the graph database. The former values of each updated attributes are transmitted to time series database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An entity in `Stellio` is stored as a set of linked nodes via labelled edges. Any updates on attributes of this entity  will update the values of the nodes and produces a new storing event in time series databases for the former values. In a such process, the context is stored in a graph database, latest values of properties and relationships are also stored in the graph database. The former values of each updated attributes are transmitted to a time series database.
```

Queries then over the `Stellio` context broker are processed according to their nature. Queries about entities (get the actual values of the entity) are processed in the Graph database since they are stored there. Queries about the temporal evolution of an entity (historical data) are processed in the time series database since they are stored there.

[Top](#top)
## NGSI-LD Mapping in Stellio

> The graph database in `Stellio` follows the basics of the semantic Web specifications. It is mainly based a triplets format where a triplet consists of a subject (node), an object(node) and a relation (vertex) relating the subject and the object. 

Reviewer: triplet? is it the correct word in English?

> The proposed mapping approach consist of mapping an [NGSI-LD entity attributes](#NGSI-LD-Data-Model) as follow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed mapping approach for an [NGSI-LD entity](#NGSI-LD-Data-Model) is as follow:
```

    - Relationship of Relationship: each sub-relationship is mapped to a subject node and new `has_object` vertex will link these Relationships. The sub-relationship is related to the tagged Entity via two vertexes labelled `has_object` and the name of the sub-Relationship.

    - Property of a Relationship: each sub-property of a relationship will be be mapped to a subject node and a new `has_value` vertex will be link between the relationship to its  sub-property nodes. 

    - Relationship of a Property: each sub-relationship of a property is mapped to a subject node and linked via the vertex labelled `has_object`. The sub-relationship is related to the tagged Entity via two vertexes labelled `has_object` and the name of the Relationship.

[Top](#top)
## NGSI-LD Mapping Example in Stellio

> Below  an example of an NGSI-LD Vehicle Entity issued from the [NGSI-LD specification](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/CIM/001_099/009/01.01.01_60/gs_CIM009v010101p.pdf)

Reviewer: can you update the link to last version of the specification (1.3.1) ?

> Below  an example of an NGSI-LD Vehicle Entity issued from the [NGSI-LD specification](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/CIM/001_099/009/01.01.01_60/gs_CIM009v010101p.pdf)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below  an example of an NGSI-LD Vehicle Entity issued from the [NGSI-LD specification](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/CIM/001_099/009/01.03.01_60/gs_CIM009v010301p.pdf)
```
